---
title: "Better scores, better future? Chinese mothers striving to balance children’s academic achievement and holistic development"
authors: "Hu, L., Xie, H., Lin, J., Bian, Q., & Nakkula, M."
year: 2025
type: talk
venue: "Society for Research in Child Development (SRCD) Biennial Meeting"
location: "Minneapolis, MN, United States"
presentation: "Paper symposium: Academic Expectations of Chinese Parents on Their Adolescent Child: Visions, Communication, Practices, and Impacts"
date: 2025-04-01
---
Abstract: 
Background: In China, academic achievement has long been a primary goal of child-rearing and an indicator of effective parenting (Wang & Tamis-LeMonda, 2003). Rooted in traditional Chinese culture, academic success signifies not only personal growth and diligence but also fulfilling filial duties (Luo et al., 2013). While the focus on academic success remains strong in the competitive landscape of contemporary Chinese society, it often induces substantial psychological stress in adolescents and restricts their exploration of personal interests and future planning (Chen-Bouck et al., 2017). As modern Chinese parents increasingly prioritize their children's holistic development and well-being, they may face a dilemma in balancing broader aspirations with high academic expectations, particularly as their children approach the critical college entrance examination. This study examined Chinese mothers' expectations for their adolescent children and the actions they take to support goal achievement, both academically and beyond.

Method: Individual, semi-structured interviews were conducted with 24 urban Chinese mothers whose adolescent children were attending high schools. The interviews focused on their aspirations, expectations, and plans for their children’s futures. Additionally, we explored how these mothers communicate with their children regarding future goals and the supportive actions they take to foster their children’s success.

Results: Chinese mothers often prioritized autonomy, happiness, and stability in their ideal vision for their children's futures while downplaying the emphasis on academic performance. However, academic success remained central in their practical planning, with shared goals between mother and children often focused on high scores. Mothers actively supported these goals by managing daily routines, arranging tutoring, and monitoring behaviors to keep their children academically focused. When children had ve lower academic performance, mothers tended to hold diminished expectations and put more pressure on their children for academic improvement through greater diligence. Some mothers also expressed feelings of resignation and helplessness towards the intense social competition and academic pressures that their children faced.

Aligned with this focus on academic success, a common belief revealed by mothers was that strong academic performance naturally led to a successful career and life. That being said, discussions around career planning in mother-child communication tended to be limited and surfacial, with only a few mothers taking proactive steps to explore or prepare for specific career paths beyond academics.

Discussion: Chinese mothers face significant dilemmas as they strive to prepare their children for future success while also nurturing their overall development and well-being. Although they value broader developmental goals, a prevailing belief that academic success is crucial for securing future opportunities persists. Despite their concerns about the intense social competition, many mothers feel compelled to push their children to excel academically and pursue higher degrees to remain competitive. This strong focus on academic achievement may reflect a passive response to societal pressures. It underscores the internal conflicts that Chinese mothers encounter as they navigate varying childrearing beliefs and values. The narrow emphasis on academics, along with the lack of emphasis on career exploration, may create challenges for young adults transitioning from academic study to their careers.
